

===== PAGE 1 =====
246 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON AUDIO, SPEECH AND LANGUAGE PROCESSING, VOL. 34, 2026
PhiNet: Speaker V eriﬁcation With
Phonetic Interpretability
Yi Ma , Student Member , IEEE, Shuai Wang , Senior Member , IEEE, Tianchi Liu , Student Member , IEEE,
and Haizhou Li , Fellow, IEEE
Abstract—Despite remarkable progress, automatic speaker ver-
iﬁcation (ASV) systems typically lack the transparency required
for high-accountability applications. Motivated by how human
experts perform forensic speaker comparison (FSC), we propose a
speaker veriﬁcation network with phonetic interpretability,PhiNet,
designed to enhance both local and global interpretability by lever-
aging phonetic evidence in decision-making. For users, PhiNet
provides detailed phonetic-level comparisons that enable manual
inspection of speaker-speciﬁc features and facilitate a more critical
evaluation of veriﬁcation outcomes. For developers, it offers explicit
reasoning behind veriﬁcation decisions, simplifying error tracing
and informing hyperparameter selection. In our experiments, we
demonstrate PhiNet’s interpretability with practical examples, in-
cluding its application in analyzing the impact of different hyperpa-
rameters. We conduct both qualitative and quantitative evaluations
of the proposed interpretability methods and assess speaker veri-
ﬁcation performance across multiple benchmark datasets, includ-
ing V oxCeleb, SITW, and LibriSpeech. Results show that PhiNet
achieves performance comparable to traditional black-box ASV
models while offering meaningful, interpretable explanations for
its decisions, bridging the gap between ASV and forensic analysis.
Index Terms —Speaker veriﬁcation, interpretability, forensic
speaker comparison, phonetic, XAI.
I. I NTRODUCTION
A
UTOMA TIC speaker veriﬁcation (ASV) seeks to validate
an identity claim based on the speaker’s voice. Successful
ASV models include Gaussian Mixture Model-Universal
Background Model (GMM-UBM) [1], [2], [3], [4], i-vector [5],
Received 16 March 2025; revised 7 October 2025 and 21 November 2025;
accepted 22 November 2025. Date of publication 10 December 2025; date of
current version 26 December 2025. This work was supported in part by the
National Natural Science Foundation of China under Grant 62401377 and Grant
62271432, in part by Shenzhen Science and Technology Program Shenzhen
Key Laboratory under Grant ZDSYS20230626091302006, and in part by the
Program for Guangdong Introducing Innovative and Entrepreneurial Teams
under Grant 2023ZT10X044. The associate editor coordinating the review of this
article and approving it for publication was Dr. Xiao-Lei Zhang.(Corresponding
author: Shuai Wang.)
Yi Ma is with the Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering,
National University of Singapore, Singapore 119077 (e-mail: mayi@u.nus.edu).
Shuai Wang is with the School of Intelligence Science and Technology,
Nanjing University, Suzhou 215163, China, and also with Shenzhen Loop Area
Institute, Shenzhen 518045, China (e-mail: shuaiwang@nju.edu.cn).
Tianchi Liu is with the Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering,
National University of Singapore, Singapore 119077, and also with LIGHT-
SPEED, Singapore 068897 (e-mail: tianch_liu@u.nus.edu).
Haizhou Li is with the School of Artiﬁcial Intelligence, Shenzhen Research
Institute of Big Data, The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Shenzhen 518172,
China, and also with Shenzhen Loop Area Institute, Shenzhen 518045, China
(e-mail: haizhouli@cuhk.edu.cn).
The code can be found in: https://github.com/mmmmayi/PhiNet
Digital Object Identiﬁer 10.1109/TASLPRO.2025.3642540
and recently neural network-based approaches such as
x-vector [6], r-vector [7] and ECAPA-TDNN [8], which
have dramatically improved both accuracy and robustness in
speaker veriﬁcation tasks. While forensic speaker comparison
(FSC) also seeks to validate identity claims, it emphasizes
collecting evidence to support decision-making [9], [10],
[11]. Unlike ASV , FSC is inherently complex, with decisions
often subject to debate. Speech scientists acknowledge that
voice alone cannot be used to conﬁrm identity with absolute
certainty [9]. Consequently, forensic experts rely on detailed and
persuasive evidence to support their conclusions, particularly
in legal contexts, where ﬁndings must be presented in a manner
understandable to judges and open to scrutiny. Despite their
shared objective, ASV and FSC approach speaker veriﬁcation
differently. FSC employs scientiﬁc tools such as voice activity
detectors, spectrogram analyzers, and pitch trackers to form
expert opinions, whereas ASV systems typically function as
black-box models [11], [12], [13], [14]. These systems typically
produce a single similarity score to indicate a match between
voice samples, offering minimal interpretability [15]. This lack
of transparency undermines the trust of the user due to concerns
about the reliability of the system and potential biases.
Providing evidence for speaker veriﬁcation not only builds
user trust but also facilitates error tracing and correction
through explicit reasoning. In contrast, the opaque nature of
ASV prevents model designers from identifying the root causes
of errors, limiting opportunities for direct improvements [16].
To address these limitations of black-box ASV , we aim to
bridge the gap between ASV and FSC, making ASV results
useful as forensic evidence, where transparency, reliability, and
accountability are crucial.
A key distinction between ASV and FSC lies in how FSC
extracts evidence. FSC extracts evidence primarily through three
methods. First, visual spectrogram inspection, based on the hy-
pothesis that each voice has unique ﬁngerprint-like features[17],
which is now regarded as scientiﬁcally unreliable due to its
subjectivity [18], [19]. Second, linguistic-based analysis, widely
established in forensic settings[9], [19], [20], which decomposes
speech into units such as consonants, vowels, and intonation
for acoustic and auditory analysis. Third, automatic techniques
increasingly integrated with linguistic analysis, which quantify
features like fundamental frequency (f0) and formants, and
expressing results as likelihood ratios [21], [22], [23]. Across
all FSC methods, phonetic information remains crucial for pro-
ducing reliable and defensible veriﬁcation evidence.
2998-4173 © 2025 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining, and training of artiﬁcial intelligence and similar technologi es.
Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index. html for more information.
Authorized licensed use limited to: WUHAN UNIVERSITY OF TECHNOLOGY. Downloaded on February 12,2026 at 04:08:19 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

===== PAGE 2 =====
MA et al.: PHINET: SPEAKER VERIFICA TION WITH PHONETIC INTERPRETABILITY 247
Motivated by the evidential approach in FSC, we introduce
the Speaker V eriﬁcation with Phonetic Interpretability Network
(PhiNet), which enhances ASV by providing linguistic-based
evidence alongside the veriﬁcation score. On one hand, this evi-
dence deconstructs the ﬁnal score into observable phonetic-level
comparisons, highlighting the contribution of each segment. We
r e f e rt ot h i sa slocal interpretability since it operates at the trial
level. On the other hand, PhiNet offers global interpretability
by ranking phonemes based on their distinctiveness for speaker
identiﬁcation, thereby assisting researchers in understanding
potential system biases. Notably, our research reveals that the
distinctiveness rank of phonemes in our model aligns with
their importance observed in FSC. For example, our model
consistently identiﬁes nasals and vowels as crucial for speaker
veriﬁcation, while also capturing signiﬁcant variability in the
distinctiveness of fricative sounds. In summary, this paper makes
the following contributions:
r To bridge the gap between ASV and FSC, especially the
black-box nature of current ASV systems, we propose
PhiNet, the ﬁrst self-interpretable speaker veriﬁcation net-
work that explains its decision-making process.
r PhiNet leverages phoneme distinctiveness, offering
dual interpretability: (a) Locally, PhiNet reveals each
phoneme’s contribution to the veriﬁcation decision of an
for individual trial; (b) Globally, it identiﬁes patterns con-
sistent with FSC heuristics, demonstrating which speciﬁc
phoneme and its pronunciation patterns signiﬁcantly con-
tribute to the veriﬁcation outcome.
r Unlike most ASV models that only focus on making veriﬁ-
cation decision, PhiNet implements a training scheme that
simulates the veriﬁcation process, ensuring consistency
between training and veriﬁcation phases and enhancing
the reliability of interpretable decisions.
r Through comprehensive experimental analysis, we un-
cover insights that explain previously observed phenom-
ena in speaker recognition, such as the poor robustness
of short-duration speaker recognition and the impact of
training segment length on veriﬁcation performance.
The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. In
Section II we introduce the related work. In Section III we
formulate PhiNet and its training scheme. Section IV discusses
the experimental setup. In SectionV, we report the experimental
results. Section VI concludes the study.
II. R
ELA TEDWORK
We ﬁrst introduce the concept of neural network interpretabil-
ity in the general ﬁeld of machine learning, then discuss the
current research on neural network interpretability for speaker-
related tasks.
A. Neural Network Interpretability
Interpretability in neural networks, also known as explanabil-
ity, has gained prominence in deep learning due to the black-box
nature of these models. It refers to methods that reveal how a
model reaches its conclusions [16], [24], [25]. In this section,
following the taxonomy in [24], we classify interpretability
methods along two axes of passive vs. active and global vs.
local.
1) Passive vs. Active: Passive interpretation methods present
explanations from a model’s existing predictions without alter-
ing the neural network’s architecture or training process. In con-
trast, active methods, or self-interpretable techniques, modify
the model architecture or training process for interpretability,
which are considered more accurate and direct [26], [27].
a) Passive interpretation: In early stages, extracting logical
rules or building decision trees were the approach making model
decisions more interpretable [28], [29]. Other popular meth-
ods include feature attribution, divided into backpropagation-
based (e.g., gradients to assess feature impact [30], [31], [32],
[33], [34]) and model-agnostic approaches (e.g., LIME [35]
and Shapley V alues [36], [37], which use perturbation-based
analysis [38], [39]). Techniques like activation maximization
reveal high-level features by optimizing inputs to maximize neu-
ron activations [40], [41], [42], [43]. Additionally, data-centric
methods explain predictions by identifying inﬂuential training
samples [44], [45].
b) Active interpretation: Prototype-based methods, such as
ProtoPNet [27], [46], [47], [48] and its variants (e.g. De-
formable ProtoPNet [49], PIP-Net [50] and XProtoNet [51]),
compare inputs to learned prototypes, producing intuitive ex-
planations. Based on this, to ensure explanations remain stable
under transformations of the input data, SITE [26] integrates
transformation-equivariant prototypes into the model’s archi-
tecture. Concept Bottleneck Models [52]
use a method similar
to prototype, and the language models advances this to generate
bottleneck concepts without human-labeled attributes [53]. Fea-
ture ranking [54], [55] and component modeling [56], [57], [58]
further enhance interpretability by prioritizing relevant features
and analyzing internal components.
2) Local vs. Global: At the same time, interpretable neural
networks can be categorized into local and global forms based
on the scope of their interpretability. Local interpretation aims
to provide insights into why the model produced a particular
output for a speciﬁc input. In contrast, global interpretability
focuses on understanding the overall decision logic of a model,
which is consistent for all samples. However the topic of global
interpretability remains relatively underexplored.
a) Local interpretation: Techniques in this category often
rely on attribution methods, which highlight the importance
of individual input features. For example, one popular local
interpretation method is the gradient-based [31], [32], [34] and
perturbation-based [35], [36], [37] attribution approaches we
mentioned above, such as Grad-CAM [31] and LIME [35] that
identify the regions of an input that most inﬂuenced a prediction.
Rule-based methods, such as those in[59] and [60], also provide
local interpretability. For example, [59] introduces anchors,
the high-precision, model-agnostic if-then rules that ensure a
prediction remains consistent when their conditions are met.
Similarly, [60] proposes a contrastive explanation framework
that identiﬁes minimal features both necessary to justify a pre-
diction and those whose absence is critical to preserving it.
b) Global interpretation: Zhang et al. [41] develops a method
to transform traditional CNNs into interpretable CNNs, ensuring
that each high-level ﬁlter explicitly represents distinct object
Authorized licensed use limited to: WUHAN UNIVERSITY OF TECHNOLOGY. Downloaded on February 12,2026 at 04:08:19 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

===== PAGE 3 =====
248 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON AUDIO, SPEECH AND LANGUAGE PROCESSING, VOL. 34, 2026
parts. Wojtas and Cheny [54] integrated feature subset selection
with model performance optimization, providing global insights
into feature contributions and enhancing explainability through
a stochastic optimization strategy. Pedapati et al.[61] introduced
a technique for constructing globally interpretable models that
closely align with local contrastive explanations derived from
black-box models. Fong and V edaldi[42] proposed the Net2V ec
framework, which maps semantic concepts to vector embed-
dings aligned with neural network ﬁlter activations. Unlike local
interpretability, global interpretability uncovers patterns and
rules that deﬁne a network’s decision-making across the entire
dataset, offering a comprehensive, systemic understanding of
its behavior. Furthermore, it transcends individual predictions
by revealing the fundamental principles learned by the net-
work [24].
B. Interpretability for Speaker-Related Tasks
The topic of interpretability has recently gained attention
in speaker-related tasks as well. Most existing studies have
primarily focused on explaining closed-set speaker recognition
tasks, while open-set speaker veriﬁcation tasks remain largely
unexplored. For speaker recognition tasks, identifying the time-
frequency bins within input features that are most critical to the
network has become a popular approach for interpretability. For
example, Li et al. [62] investigated the reliability of three Class
Activation Map-based algorithms as visualization tools for deep
speaker recognition models. Building on this, they utilized these
methods to analyze the effects of data augmentation on model
robustness [63] and to evaluate the contributions of various
phoneme categories to deep speaker models [64]. Similarly,
Zhang et al. [65] also used visualization as an interpretability
tool to analyze speaker recognition models, using ﬁve attribution
methods, including Integrated Gradients [32] and SHAP [37],t o
visualize voiceprint features within the ECAPA-TDNN frame-
work. Similarly, Thebaud et al. [66] leveraged Integrated Gradi-
ents to assess the contribution of various phoneme categories
to the performance of speaker veriﬁcation models. Beyond
visualization, Ben-Amor et al. [67] proposed a novel explain-
ability framework using the Binary-Attribute Likelihood Ratio
(BA-LR), which decomposes speaker recognition scoring into
interpretable sub-processes based on binary speech attributes.
The work most closely related to the method we pursue[68] is
the explainable attribute-based speaker veriﬁcation framework
proposed by Wu et al. [69]. In our previous work [68],w ei n t r o -
duced phonetic traits to represent the speaker-speciﬁc informa-
tion embedded in each phoneme. However, these traits were uti-
lized passively to explain the speaker network rather than being
directly involved in the prediction process. This approach may
lead to a gap in faithfulness between the provided explanations
and the actual working mechanism. In [69], the authors adopt a
two-stage pipeline leveraging Concept Bottleneck Models [52]
to integrate explainability directly into the speaker veriﬁcation
process. However, their system’s performance is limited by a
small set of attributes that lack generalization, resulting in a
signiﬁcant compromise of accuracy. It is worth noting that most
existing interpretability studies for speaker-related tasks adopt
passive and local interpretability methods. While these methods
are effective in explaining speciﬁc predictions, they often fail
to provide insights into the overall decision-making logic of the
model. Additionally, while visualization tools have proven ef-
fective for analyzing closed-set tasks, their applicability remains
limited when it comes to open-set tasks like speaker veriﬁcation,
where the ability to generalize to unseen speakers is critical.
III. M
ETHODOLOGY
We introduce a novel interpretability framework designed to
provide both global and local insights into the decision-making
process of speaker veriﬁcation. Fig. 1 shows the overall archi-
tecture of our proposed PhiNet, which is composed of three key
components: the phonetic trait extractor, trait-level comparison
layer, and decision layer.
A. V eriﬁcation With Phonetic Interpretability
Our PhiNet performs speaker veriﬁcation by comparing the
enrollment and test utterance to generate a score that quantiﬁes
the similarity between the speakers of these two utterances.
Let’s assume a phonetic inventory of I phonemes. For a pair
of utterances, the phonetic trait extractor generates a set of I
phonetic traits, denoted as E = {ei}I
i=1 and T = {ti}I
i=1 for
the pair. Eachei and ti captures the speaker-speciﬁc information
associated with phoneme i in an utterance.
In the phonetic trait comparison layer, we compute the pho-
netic scoresi for each phoneme i based on the cosine similarity
between ei and ti. This score quantiﬁes the similarity of speaker
information for phoneme i across the two utterances.
Considering that the ability of phonemes varies in terms of
speaker characterization, higher weights should be assigned to
phonemes that are more discriminative. In this way, phonetic
score for these high-weight phonemes dominates the ﬁnal score.
Conversely, phonemes that contribute less to speaker identiﬁca-
tion are assigned lower weights, thereby reducing their inﬂuence
on the ﬁnal score. The weight, quantiﬁed and denoted as w
i,i s
jointly learned with our network. The ﬁnal score for these two
utterances is computed as the weighted average of si, where the
weights are given by the wi.
This process interprets veriﬁcation as a comparison of speaker
information within each phonetic segment, allowing users to
examine the spectrograms of speciﬁc phonetic segments as
evidence. Additionally, w
i, serves as a global interpretability
factor, which reﬂects the potential cognitive bias of the model.
The phonetic weight allows users to understand the model’s
reliance on each phoneme, providing transparency to check if
the model works reasonably.
B. Architecture
1) Phonetic Trait Extractor: A ss h o w ni nF i g .2, the phonetic
trait extractor consists of two main components: frame-level
layers and phonetic-level layers, creating a ﬁne-to-coarse hier-
archical structure. Given that frame-level feature extractors are
commonly used in speaker veriﬁcation networks, without loss of
generality, we adopt the frame-level layers in ECAPA-TDNN to
generateD-dimensional frame-level feature. Aligned with pho-
netic boundaries provided by a pre-trained phoneme recognizer
Authorized licensed use limited to: WUHAN UNIVERSITY OF TECHNOLOGY. Downloaded on February 12,2026 at 04:08:19 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

===== PAGE 4 =====
MA et al.: PHINET: SPEAKER VERIFICA TION WITH PHONETIC INTERPRETABILITY 249
Fig. 1. Block diagram of the proposed framework for speaker veriﬁcation with phonetic interpretability.
Fig. 2. Block diagram of the phonetic trait extractor.
in textless mode [70], frame-level features are then passed to
the phonetic-level layer. Using these phonetic boundaries, we
calculate the average of frame-level features within phoneme
i segment. This averaged representation is treated as the pho-
netic trait, which we consider to capture the speaker-speciﬁc
characteristics associated with phoneme i. For phonemes that
do not appear in a given utterance, the associated phonetic trait
is set to 0 for the absent phoneme i. This design is consistent
with our prior work [68], we invite readers to consult the full
paper and accompanying code 1 for a deeper understanding of
the implementation.
2) Trait Level Comparison: We compute the cosine similar-
ity of each pair of(ei, ti). Due to adapting the frame-level layers
of ECAPA-TDNN, the extracted phonetic traits are constrained
to be nonnegative, making the resulting cosine similarity fall
within the range [0, 1]. A transformation function is applied
on the cosine similarity, which spans the result into range of
[−∞, +∞]:
di = ei · ti
∥ei∥∥ti∥, (1)
si = f2
(
φ
(
f1(di)
))
·di, (2)
wheref1 andf2 are linear layers with an intermediate dimension
c and f2 has no bias term. Speciﬁcally, f1 : R1 → Rc, and f2 :
1https://github.com/mmmmayi/ExPO
Fig. 3. Illustration of two conditions of adjusting phonetic scores based on
phoneme distinctiveness. The top ﬁgure shows the adjustment when the phonetic
score is closer toa, while the bottom ﬁgure depicts the adjustment when the score
is closer tob. Here,a andb represent the scores for completely different speakers
and the same speaker, respectively.
Rc → R1, wherec controls the dimension of the mapping vector.
Both f1 and f2 are shared across all phoneme. φis the Tanh
activation function.
3) Decision Layer: In the decision layer, we generate the ﬁ-
nal score using [s1,s 2,...,s I ] and [w1,w 2,...,w I ]. The weight
wi is designed to amplify the contribution of si if phoneme i
is distinctive for speaker veriﬁcation, otherwise to reduce the
contribution of si. This effect is illustrated in Fig. 3. Con-
sider an example where a represents the similarity score for
completely different speakers and b represents the score for
identical speakers, with the constrains a<b and si ∈[a,b ].
We assume that the midpoint between a and b serves as the
threshold. If si is closer to a, the trial is classiﬁed as involving
different speakers. Conversely, it is considered to originate from
the same speaker. When si is closer to a before adjustment
and phoneme i is distinctive, wi should adjust si shift further
toward to a. Conversely, for a non-distinctive phoneme i,T h e
weighted si should have a larger distance to a than before. It’s
worth to mention that even for a non-distinctive phoneme i,t h e
adjustment should not contradict the conclusion derived from the
originalsi. In other words, if|si −a|≤| si −b| before applying
wi, this relationship should hold true after adjustment.
A straightforward approach to implement this functionality is
to ensure si ∈R andwi ∈[0, 1], while assuming a threshold of
Authorized licensed use limited to: WUHAN UNIVERSITY OF TECHNOLOGY. Downloaded on February 12,2026 at 04:08:19 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

===== PAGE 5 =====
250 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON AUDIO, SPEECH AND LANGUAGE PROCESSING, VOL. 34, 2026
0 for distinguishing between target and non-target trials. After
applying min-max normalization to a learnable vector ˆw of size
I × 1, we obtain w, which serves as the phonetic weights:
w = ˆw −min( ˆw)
max( ˆw)−min( ˆw)+ ϵ, (3)
where ϵ represents an arbitrarily small positive number.
The element of w, denoted as wi, is used in the computation
of the prediction score y:
y = φ
(
1∑I
i [I (ei ̸= 0∧ti ̸= 0)·wi]
I∑
i=1
wisi
)
, (4)
where∧represents the logical AND operator.I(·) is the indicator
function, having 1 if the condition is true and 0 otherwise. w is
optimized jointly with the network during training, allowing the
model to learn the relative distinctiveness of each phoneme for
accurate speaker veriﬁcation.
C. Training Scheme
We have discussed the process above where only one pair of
utterances are compared. In this section, we describe the training
scheme with K pair of utterances fed into the model as a batch.
Speciﬁcally, we randomly selectedK speakers, and each speaker
contributes two randomly selected utterances. We viewed these
two utterances as enrollment and test utterance respectively to
simulate the inference process.
Given a batch of utterances, the phonetic trait for each speaker
is denoted as E
k = {ei
k}I
i=1 and T k = {ti
k}I
i=1 respectively,
with k =1 , 2,...,K . The score for enrollment utterance from
the speakerk and test utterance from the speaker j is denoted as
ykj .
In this way, the network is expected to derive a high value
for ykj if k = j, otherwise, low value for ykj . Based on this
hypothesis, we propose the veriﬁcation loss Lveri :
Lveri = − 1
K
K∑
k=1
log exp(ykk )∑K
j=1 exp(ykj )
. (5)
The Lveri is applied on each enrollment utterance in this batch
and the model is forced to identify the test utterance from the
same speaker.
We also propose the phonetic trait lossLpho to strengthen the
trait consistency for the same speaker while discriminates the
traits between different speakers:
Lpho = α
N1
I∑
i=1
K∑
k=1
I(ei
k ̸= 0∧ti
k ̸= 0)||ei
k −ti
k||2
− β
N2
I∑
i=1
K∑
k=1
min
j̸=k
I(ei
k ̸= 0∧ti
j ̸= 0)||ei
k −ti
j||2, (6)
N1 = ∑I
i=1
∑K
k=1 I(ei
k ̸= 0∧ti
k ̸= 0) and N2 = ∑I
i=1∑K
k=1 I(ei
k ̸= 0∧ti
j ̸= 0) are two denominators. α and β
are hyper-parameters to balance the loss for inter-speaker and
intra-speaker trait. The ﬁrst term of (6) enforces the consistency
of phonetic traits between matched pairs ( ei
k, ti
k) for the same
phoneme, while the second term maximizes the dissimilarity
between ei
k and its most similar unmatched counterpart ti
k,
retaining only the smallest distance among unmatched pairs.
The model is optimized by Lveri and Lpho simultaneously,
and the total loss is deﬁned as
Lall = γLveri +Lpho, (7)
whereγis the balancing weight for two loss values.
IV . EXPERIMENTS
A. Dataset
Our experiments are carried out on the V oxCeleb 1 [71],
V oxCeleb 2 [72], the Speaker In the Wild (SITW) [73], and
LibriSpeech [74].
1) V oxCeleb 1: V oxCeleb 1 is a large-scale audio-visual
dataset widely used for speaker recognition and veriﬁcation
tasks. It contains 153,516 utterances collected from 1,251 speak-
ers, extracted from Y ouTube videos. V oxCeleb 1 is collected un-
der real-world conditions and includes variations in age, accent,
gender, and language. The dataset is divided into training set
and test set, and three trial lists, including V ox1-O, V ox1-E and
V ox1-H, are provided. The training set consists of audio data
from 1,211 speakers, containing more than 148,642 utterances,
and the test set contains 4,874 utterances from 40 speakers. The
trial list V ox1-O is generated from the test set, while V ox1-E and
V ox1-H are drawn from the training set. We use the training set
of V oxCeleb1 to ﬁne-tune the hyper-parameters and V ox1-O to
evaluate the system in ablation experiments.
2) V oxCeleb 2: V oxCeleb 2 is an extension of the V oxCeleb 1
dataset, providing a larger and more diverse collection of audio-
visual data for speaker recognition research. It contains over 1
million utterances from 6,112 speakers. We name the training set
of V oxCeleb2 as “V ox2” in following sections, which consists
of 5,994 speakers and 1,092,009 utterances.
3) SITW: Similarly to V oxCeleb 1 and 2, SITW is a large,
publicly available dataset designed to reﬂect real-world condi-
tions in speaker recognition research. The SITW dataset contains
audio recordings of 299 speakers, with approximately 6,000 ut-
terances collected from open-source media [73]. To evaluate our
system, we use the the ofﬁcial trial lists of “core-core” condition
from the evaluation parts of the dataset (SITW-eval), which con-
tain 721,788 trials, respectively. Unlike the V oxCeleb1-O/E/H
test sets, which have a balanced number of target and non-target
trials, SITW exhibits a signiﬁcantly imbalanced distribution.
Speciﬁcally, the counts for target and non-target trials in SITW-
eval are 3,658 and 718,130 respectively.
4) LibriSpeech: The LibriSpeech is a widely used corpus of
read English speech. It consists of approximately 1,000 hours
of speech data derived from audiobooks in the public domain.
The dataset includes recordings from a wide range of speakers,
covering various ages, accents, and genders. LibriSpeech also
provides text transcriptions for all the recordings. Our phoneme
recognizer is pre-trained on the LibriSpeech, with the phonetic
inventory containing 39 units in the CMU phoneme set [75] and
a non-verbal label [N-V]. Therefore, I =4 0 in our paper.
We also use the LibriSpeech as one of our test set to evaluate
the generalization ability of our model. Since there is no ofﬁcial
trial list for LibriSpeech, we randomly generated one target and
Authorized licensed use limited to: WUHAN UNIVERSITY OF TECHNOLOGY. Downloaded on February 12,2026 at 04:08:19 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

===== PAGE 6 =====
MA et al.: PHINET: SPEAKER VERIFICA TION WITH PHONETIC INTERPRETABILITY 251
one non-target trial for each utterance in the train-clean-100,
train-clean-360, dev-clean, and test-clean subsets, resulting in a
total of 275,752 trials.
B. Experimental Setup
Our system is implemented using WeSpeaker toolkit[76].T h e
feature is an 80-dimensional log-mel ﬁlterbank (FBank) with a
window size of 400 and a hop length of 160. The frequency
range is from 20 Hz to 7600 Hz. We use ECAPA-TDNN [8]
as the backbone and follow the conﬁguration of “ecapa-tdnn” in
WeSpeaker to train our model. Following the setting of ECAPA-
TDNN, D is set as 1,536. We increase the number of epochs
to 13,650 so that the number of samples used for training is
approximately equal to the toolkit settings. Our model is trained
with Stochastic Gradient Descent (SGD) as the optimizer. The
initial learning rate is set to 0.1 and exponentially decays to
0.00005. To ensure the learning rate aligns with the baseline
conﬁguration, γis set to 0.5. The MUSAN dataset (babble,
noise, music) [77] and the RIR dataset (reverb) [78] are used
for augmentation. The samples are subjected to 0.6 probability
of not being augmented, 0.2 probability of adding noise, and 0.2
probability of adding reverberation during training. The duration
of each training sample is set to 3 seconds, withK andc assigned
values of 128 and 2, respectively, unless stated otherwise.
C. Baseline Setting
The ECAPA-TDNN serves as the black-box model for per-
formance comparison. For the baseline setup, we ﬁrst adopt the
pre-trained ECAPA-TDNN released in the open-source project
wespeaker,2 which matches the same model conﬁguration as the
one used in our experiments.
To further eliminate the possible confounding effects brought
by different loss functions and pooling mechanisms, we addi-
tionally reproduced an ECAPA-TDNN model trained following
exactly the same training pipeline as ours. Speciﬁcally, to ensure
a fair comparison between the ECAPA-TDNN and our proposed
model, we adopted a metric learning approach for training
ECAPA-TDNN, speciﬁcally utilizing the Angular Prototypical
Loss function [79]. In addition, there are two further differences
between the reproduced ECAPA-TDNN and the released
pre-trained model. To avoid introducing phoneme distortion
and ensure that augmentation does not become an additional
confounding variable, we excluded speed perturbation from
the reproduced model. Furthermore, we employed temporal
statistics pooling instead of the attentive statistics pooling used
in the pre-trained model, so as to minimize the contribution
of attention-based pooling biases. These adjustments allow
the comparison to be primarily focused on the difference
between an interpretable system and a black-box system, rather
than differences arising from augmentation choices or pooling
mechanisms. To facilitate reproducibility, we release our code at
https://github.com/mmmmayi/LightWespeaker_Prototypical.
2https://wenet.org.cn/downloads?models=wespeaker&version=voxceleb_
ECAPA512.zip
D. Evaluation Metric
1) Evaluating Speaker V eriﬁcation Performance: We report
the speaker veriﬁcation performance in term of equal error rate
(EER) and minimum detection cost function (minDCF) with
ptarget =0 .05.
2) Evaluating Interpretability: Our approach of global in-
terpretability involves ranking the individual contributions of
phonetic traits to the ﬁnal prediction score. To verify the reli-
ability of this ranking, we perform the leave- ith-phoneme-out
experiments on the input spectrogram. Speciﬁcally, following
this ranking, we sequentially remove the segments within each
phoneme from the input spectrogram. The hypothesis is that
if a phoneme signiﬁcantly inﬂuences prediction, its removal
will result in a substantial decrease in performance, whereas the
removal of phonemes with lower rankings will yield negligible
changes. This performance variation due to segment removal
serves as a qualitative validation of the system’s global inter-
pretability.
Local interpretability relies on the hypothesis that each pho-
netic trait encodes speaker information speciﬁc within its corre-
sponding phonetic segments. To evaluate the faithfulness of this
hypothesis, we employ a similar evaluation method to that used
for global interpretability. Instead of removing speciﬁc phonetic
segments from the spectrogram, we exclude the corresponding
phonetic traits during the decision process. If a phonetic trait
truly represents speaker information localized to speciﬁc seg-
ments, the performance impact of removing the trait should
closely align with that of removing the corresponding spec-
trogram segments. To quantify this faithfulness, we calculate
the mean absolute difference between the performance changes
caused by these two types of removal across all phonemes,
deﬁning as the ﬁdelity score. A lower ﬁdelity score reﬂects better
alignment, indicating that phonetic traits accurately represent
localized speaker information.
V. R ESULTS
A. Local Interpretation
In this section, we discuss the local interpretation, focusing on
trial-level explanations provided by the proposed model. Fig. 4
offers a detailed visualization of the model’s decision-making
process for both non-target and target trials. It illustrates
the spectrograms of phonetic segments from enrollment
and test utterances, alongside their pairwise comparisons,
which are represented by the original cosine similarity, the
phonetic similarity (si) scaled to the range [−∞, +∞], and the
corresponding phonetic weight (wi).
For the non-target trial, the phoneme “S”, “N”, “AH” and
“AE” demonstrates a relatively low cosine similarity, leading to
a low negative phonetic score, indicating a strong dissimilar-
ity in speaker-speciﬁc information between the corresponding
segments in the enrollment and test utterances. Notably, “N”
is assigned the highest phonetic weight of 1.00, making it a
inﬂuential factor in determining the ﬁnal score ( −0.975). In
contrast, the phoneme “F” exhibits a higher phonetic score
of 1.41, but its impact on the ﬁnal decision is signiﬁcantly
diminished due to its much lower phonetic weight of 0.01.
Authorized licensed use limited to: WUHAN UNIVERSITY OF TECHNOLOGY. Downloaded on February 12,2026 at 04:08:19 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

===== PAGE 7 =====
252 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON AUDIO, SPEECH AND LANGUAGE PROCESSING, VOL. 34, 2026
Fig. 4. Visualization of the decision making process for a non-target trial (top) and a target trial (bottom). Phonetic boundary are marked by dotted l ines in
enrollment and test utterances. “Er. Seg” and “Te. Seg” show the segments within each phoneme in enrollment and test utterance. The results shown are o btained
using the model trained under System (10) in Table II.
Fig. 5. Phonetic weight distribution across different phonemes. The results shown are obtained using the model trained under System (10) in Table II.
The target trial achieves a higher ﬁnal score of 0.997. In this
case, the phoneme “N” demonstrates a high similarity score
with phonetic score as 5.44, supported by a substantial phonetic
weight 1.00, strongly driving the decision towards a positive
match. In contrast, some phonemes, such as “HH”, exhibit a
much lower similarity score of −2.22, but it contribute almost
nothing to the ﬁnal outcome due to their negligible weight.
This detailed analysis provides a ﬁne-grained understanding
of the model’s decision-making process at the phonetic level. By
emphasizing the interaction between phonetic similarities and
their corresponding weights, the ﬁgure illustrates how individual
phonetic segments collectively inﬂuence the speaker veriﬁcation
outcomes. Additionally, with the inclusion of phoneme bound-
aries, users can further explore the model’s behavior by checking
or listening to speciﬁc segments within a particular phoneme of
interest, enabling deeper insights into the relationship between
acoustic features and model predictions.
B. Global Interpretation
The phonetic weights reﬂect the overall decision logic of the
model by indicating how much each phonetic score contributes
to the ﬁnal score. In Fig. 5, we present the rank of weights for
each phoneme. Phonemes with higher weights, such as “N”,
“S”, and “M” signiﬁcantly inﬂuence the model’s predictions in
the decision-making process. Conversely, phonemes like “B”,
“P”, and “HH” receive minimal weight, suggesting they have a
negligible impact on the model’s outcomes. The weight distri-
bution reveals that certain phonemes play a more prominent role
in shaping the prediction score, offering valuable insights into
the model’s decision-making criteria.
It is worth mentioning that this global interpretation aligns
with human perception in FSC [80], [81], [82], as nasals and
vowels (e.g., “N”, “M”, and “A Y”) are widely recognized as
more discriminative for speaker veriﬁcation tasks. Addition-
ally, the discriminative power of fricatives remains a subject
of debate [80], [83], [84]. Our results reﬂect this observation:
fricatives such as “S” and “Z” show strong discriminative power,
while other fricatives, like “HH” and “F”, receive lower weights,
indicating limited inﬂuence.
C. Impact of Sample Durations
As a crucial hyperparameter, the duration of training samples
signiﬁcantly impacts the model’s performance especially in
short-duration test conditions. As shown in TableI, while models
trained with sample durations ranging from 2 to 5 seconds
exhibit comparable performance on the full-duration test set,
a notable performance drop occurs for the model trained with
5-second samples when evaluated on a shortened 2-second test
set. This drop is commonly attributed to the model’s limited
generalization ability, caused by the mismatch between training
samples and test samples. Using our PhiNET, we provide a
Authorized licensed use limited to: WUHAN UNIVERSITY OF TECHNOLOGY. Downloaded on February 12,2026 at 04:08:19 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

===== PAGE 8 =====
MA et al.: PHINET: SPEAKER VERIFICA TION WITH PHONETIC INTERPRETABILITY 253
Fig. 6. The phonetic weight for models trained with various duration. The conﬁguration of these models are same with System (4), (6), (10), (12) and (14 )i n
Table II respectively.
TABLE I
SPEAKER VERIFICA TIONPERFORMANCE BETWEEN MODELS TRAINED ON
SAMPLES OF DIFFERENT DURA TIONS.T HE SYSTEMS ARE TRAINED UNDER
SYSTEM (4), (6), (10), (12) AND (14) IN TABLE II, AND EV ALUA TED ON
VOX1-O WITH THE WHOLE TEST SAMPLE (“WHOLE UTT”), THE FIRST 5
SECONDS (“5 S”), AND THE FIRST 2S ECONDS (“2 S”). “MIX”I NDICA TESTHA T
THE TRAINING DURA TION IN EACH MINI-BAT C H I SRANDOML YSELECTED
FROM 1 TO 5S ECONDS.
deep explanations about this mismatch by analyzing the model’s
potential cognitive biases.
Fig. 6 visualizes the phonetic weights of models trained with
different duration. Across all conﬁgurations, the ranking of
phonetic weights remains relatively similar, with phonemes like
“N”, “S”, and “M” consistently contributing the most. However,
with longer training durations (e.g. with 5 seconds), the model
relies heavily on a few dominant phonemes to make decisions.
In contrast, models trained on shorter samples, e.g. with 1 s,
exhibit a more evenly distributed weight pattern. This broader
distribution suggests that model relies on a wider range of
phonemes to compensate for the limited number of phonemes
present in shorter segments.
This observation suggests that the duration plays a role in
terms of phonetic contributions to the speaker veriﬁcation deci-
sions. Enforcing equal attention to all phonemes may lead to a
loss of the model’s capacity to capture speaker-relevant infor-
mation embedded in more informative phonemes. Conversely,
excessive dependence on phonetic features can undermine the
model’s robustness in short-duration scenarios, limiting its sta-
bility and generalization.
We further investigated the effect of training with samples of
mixed durations. Speciﬁcally, for each mini-batch, the duration
of the training utterances was randomly selected from 1 to
5 seconds. Under this training scheme, the results show that
the phonetic weights converge to 0.5 for almost all phonemes,
indicating that the model fails to learn meaningful distinctions
among phonemes for speaker recognition. We hypothesize that
each phoneme may have a distinct optimal weight for different
training durations. When the duration varies across training
samples, the model is exposed to implicit label inconsistency,
which confuses the learning process and prevents it from cap-
turing phoneme-speciﬁc discriminative patterns. As a result,
its performance on the full test utterances and the 5-second
segments is close to the worst case, as shown in Table I. When
evaluated with 2-second test samples, the mixed-duration model
performs better than models trained with ﬁxed durations of 4
or 5 seconds, but still falls short of the best result achieved
with 2-second training samples. This suggests that when the
test utterance contains a rich variety of phonemes, the ability
to model phoneme-speciﬁc discriminative patterns is crucial for
achieving high accuracy. In contrast, for short test utterances, the
importance of this ability diminishes as the phonemic diversity
decreases.
D. Interpretability Evaluation
1) V ariation of Phonetic Evidence: As introduced in Sec-
tion IV -D, we perform leave- ith-phoneme-out experiments to
evaluate the performance of global interpretability. Experiments
are conducted on multiple test sets and reported in Fig. 7.
Despite ﬂuctuations in individual test sets, the overall trend is
consistently observed across all test sets.
As expected, performance drops noticeably when high-
weighted phonemes are removed. This further conﬁrms that
phonemes with higher weights play a more crucial role in the
ﬁnal decision. The ﬁndings also show that the proposed global
interpretation method aligns well with human decision process.
2) Faithfulness of Phonetic Trait: The results in Fig. 7 re-
veal a notable gap between the performance impact of trait
removal and spectrogram segment removal. We hypothesize
that this gap arises from the expanded receptive ﬁeld in the
convolutional-based phonetic trait extractor. The stacked con-
volutional layers increase the receptive ﬁeld beyond the given
phonetic boundaries, capturing adjacent frames. This expansion
likely causes the extracted traits to encode speaker information
across multiple phonemes, compromising the faithfulness of the
system’s local interpretability. Nevertheless, the overall trend
across multiple test sets remains consistent and closely aligns
with the trend observed from spectrogram segment removal.
Authorized licensed use limited to: WUHAN UNIVERSITY OF TECHNOLOGY. Downloaded on February 12,2026 at 04:08:19 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

===== PAGE 9 =====
254 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON AUDIO, SPEECH AND LANGUAGE PROCESSING, VOL. 34, 2026
Fig. 7. Results of leave- ith-phoneme-out experiments on SITW-eval, V ox1-O and LibriSpeech. Leave- ith-phoneme-out experiments conducted in input
spectrogram are shown as “spec-sitw-eval”, “spec-vox1-O” and “spec-libriSpeech”. Correspondingly, “trait” means the phonetic trait of each phon eme is left
out and ‘baseline’ shows the EER of the network without leaving anything out.
TABLE II
PERFORMANCE IN A COMPARA TIVESTUDY BETWEEN HYPER-PARAMETERS
USED IN NETWORK TRAINING.T HE FIDELITY SCORE QUANTIFIES THE
ALIGNMENT BETWEEN PHONETIC TRAIT-BASED AND SPECTROGRAM-BASED
LEA VE-ONE-OUT SETTING.L OWER VALUES INDICA TEBETTER FAITHFULNESS.
ALL THE NETWORKS ARE TRAINED ON VOXCELEB1. “DUR”R EPRESENTS THE
DURA TION OF SECONDS OF TRAINING SAMPLE.“ α” AND “β”R EPRESENT THE
WEIGHTS ASSIGNED TO DIFFERENT COMPONENTS IN THE LOSS FUNCTION.
THE BOLDED VALUES INDICA TE THE OPTIMAL CONFIGURA TIONS.
This indicates that although convolutional networks expand
the receptive ﬁeld, the relative alignment between the output
features and the spectrogram is preserved, allowing the model
to retain local interpretability.
Table II presents the ﬁdelity scores for systems trained under
different conﬁgurations, as deﬁned in Section IV -Das the mean
absolute difference between the performance changes caused
by these two types of removals across all phonemes. These
results suggest that even when the model architecture remains
unchanged, adjustments to the training conﬁguration can en-
hance faithfulness. A more detailed analysis of this observation
will be provided in the next section.
3) Example Visualization: To provide a more intuitive view
of how phonetic traits are either distinct or entangled, we present
Fig. 8. Similarity heatmaps between the individual phonetic traits and the
centric of each phonetic traits for two speakers in the test set. The results are
obtained using the model trained under System (10) in Table II. The phoneme
order in the heatmaps (top-to-bottom and left-to-right) follows the same order
as in Fig 5. Brighter points indicate higher cosine similarity.
the similarity heatmaps in Fig. 8. For each speaker in the test
set of V oxCeleb1, we ﬁrst compute the centroid of the i-th
phonetic trait as the average of all i-th traits extracted from
that speaker’s utterances. We then calculate the average cosine
similarity between each phonetic trait and these centroids. The
higher cosine similarity indicates the phonetic trait is closer to
the centric. We observe that the diagonal elements in Fig. 8
are noticeably brighter than others, indicating that each pho-
netic trait is closer to its own centroid than to those of other
phonemes. At the same time, we notice that in the lower-right
region of the heatmap, the diagonal values tend to be less
contrasted with their neighboring entries. This suggests that
the traits corresponding to these phonemes are more easily
entangled with others, which is consistent with our previous con-
clusion that these phonemes are less discriminative for speaker
veriﬁcation.
E. Ablation Study
In this section, we compare the system trained on V ox-
Celeb1 with different conﬁguration. The performance of speaker
veriﬁcation and interpretability is evaluated on V ox1-O. For
comparison, we also show the performance of “black-box”
model ECAPA-TDNN in System (1) and (2) in Table II. Since
Authorized licensed use limited to: WUHAN UNIVERSITY OF TECHNOLOGY. Downloaded on February 12,2026 at 04:08:19 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

===== PAGE 10 =====
MA et al.: PHINET: SPEAKER VERIFICA TION WITH PHONETIC INTERPRETABILITY 255
the setting of 2-second training sample is commonly used for
black-box speaker model training [76], we present results for
ECAPA-TDNN trained with 2 and 3 seconds, respectively, for
a fair comparison.
1) Duration of Training Samples: To investigate the impact
of training sample duration on system, we compare System
(4), (6), (10), (12), and (14) in Table II, where the sample
duration increases progressively from 1 to 5 seconds. It can be
observed that the system achieves optimal speaker veriﬁcation
performance with 3-second samples (System (10)), with both
the EER and minDCF reaching their lowest values. Beyond 3
seconds, performance begins to degrade as the duration contin-
ues to increase. Meanwhile, as the duration increases, the inter-
pretability performance, measured by the Fidelity score, shows a
continuous upward trend, indicating that the model becomes less
faithful. The Fidelity score increases from 0.053 for 1-second
samples (System (4)) to 0.113 for 5-second samples (System
(14)). This suggests that longer training sample durations result
in weaker alignment between the phonetic traits and their corre-
sponding spectrogram regions, thereby reducing the faithfulness
of the model’s local interpretability. The speaker veriﬁcation
performance and Fidelity scores indicates a clear trade-off:
longer durations improve speaker veriﬁcation accuracy up to a
point but compromise local interpretability. The similar trend
is observed for systems trained exclusively with the loss of
L
veri (Systems (3), (5), (7), (11), and (13)), where performance
improves up to 3 seconds before deteriorating with longer du-
rations. Meanwhile, Fidelity score increases progressively from
0.048 to 0.133. We hypothesize that this behavior is due to the
varying amount of phonetic information present in samples of
different durations. Shorter samples may lack sufﬁcient phonetic
diversity to reliably distinguish between speakers, but the limited
number of phonemes allows the system to explore each phoneme
thoroughly, which beneﬁts interpretability. Conversely, longer
training samples may enhance the phonetic information encoded
in the phonetic traits due to expanding receptive ﬁeld, enabling
the model to capture more general speaker characteristics within
these traits.
2) Impact of L
pho: In this section, we analyze the impact
of incorporating Lpho into the training process. Models trained
solely with Lveri correspond to Systems (3), (5), (7), (11), and
(13) in Table II, each evaluated with different training sample
durations. In contrast, Systems (4), (6), (10), (12), and (14)
integrate L
pho alongside Lveri using the same weighting pa-
rameters αand β. Regarding interpretability, as measured by
the Fidelity score, the effect of Lpho remains inconsistent. For
training durations of 1 and 2 seconds, models incorporatingLpho
show a slight increase in Fidelity scores. However, for longer
durations of 3, 4, and 5 seconds, Fidelity scores tend to decrease
whenL
pho is applied.
Since Lveri may converge faster for longer training samples
because the model is easier to distinguish between speakers in
longer utterances, we further explore the effect of increasing α
and βfor training durations of 5 seconds. The corresponding
results compared with conﬁguration of 3 seconds are presented
in Table III. These ﬁndings suggest that while the weighting
of Lpho requires careful tuning for different conﬁgurations, its
TABLE III
IMPACT OF DIFFERENT THE WEIGHT OF αAND βON MODEL PERFORMANCE
DURING TRAINING
TABLE IV
PERFORMANCE EVA L U AT I O N O FMODELS TRAINED WITH DIFFERENT
DIMENSION OF MAPPING VECTOR. c IS THE DIMENSION OF THE MAPPING
VECTOR IN (2).
incorporation has the potential to enhance overall system per-
formance by leveraging phonetic information more effectively.
3) Weights in Loss Function: We ﬁnetune the weight inLpho
u s i n gaﬁ x e dαand adjust βin Systems (8), (9), and (10) of
Table II. The EER, minDCF, and Fidelity score for these three
systems are similar. However, we observed that the system be-
comes prone to crashing during training when we try a biggerβ.
Despite this, we believe that balancing inter-speaker differences
and intra-speaker consistency within the same phonemes is a
worthwhile direction and plan to explore it further in future work.
In the following sections, unless otherwise speciﬁed, we assume
thatαis 0.001 and βis 0.0015 by default.
4) Dimension of Mapping V ector: We map the raw co-
sine similarity of each pair of phonetic traits to the range of
[−∞, +∞] in (2). To ﬁnetune the dimension of the mapping
vector, we set the dimensionc to values from 1 to 4, as shown in
Table IV. The results indicate that speaker veriﬁcation perfor-
mance initially improves with increasingc, but begins to degrade
when c is set to 4. In terms of Fidelity score, we observe a
decreasing trend asc increases. Balancing both performance and
faithfulness, we select c as 2 for our subsequent experiments.
5) Augmentation During Training: We conducted experi-
ments to evaluate the impact of data augmentation for different
training conﬁguration. The systems trained with and without
augmentation methods such as adding noise and reverberation
are shown in Table V. The results reveal that the absence of
augmentation leads to a noticeable decline in both speaker
veriﬁcation performance and faithfullness. This outcome aligns
with our expectations, highlighting the crucial role of data aug-
mentation in enhancing the robustness of the model. Moreover, it
underscores that augmentation not only beneﬁts veriﬁcation ac-
curacy but also plays a key role in maintaining the interpretability
of our proposed speaker veriﬁcation system.
Authorized licensed use limited to: WUHAN UNIVERSITY OF TECHNOLOGY. Downloaded on February 12,2026 at 04:08:19 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

===== PAGE 11 =====
256 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON AUDIO, SPEECH AND LANGUAGE PROCESSING, VOL. 34, 2026
TABLE V
IMPACT OF DATA AUGMENTA TION ONMODEL PERFORMANCE DURING
TRAINING
TABLE VI
PERFORMANCE EVA L U AT I O N O FMODELS TRAINED WITH DIFFERENT
FUNCTION TO GENERA TEPHONETIC WEIGHTS
6) Generation of Phonetic Importance Weight: In our set-
tings, we use a trainable vector, normalized by min-max scaling,
as the weight for each phonetic trait in(3). To explore alternative
methods, we replaced min-max normalization with other func-
tions that map the trainable vector to non-negative values. These
functions include the Sigmoid function, min-shift normalization,
and the ReLU function. For the Sigmoid and ReLU functions,
we apply the standard Sigmoid and ReLU operations directly on
ˆw. For min-shift normalization, w is generated by subtracting
the minimum value from ˆw as w = ˆw −min( ˆw). The results
are shown in Table VI.
An interesting observation from these systems is that when
the weights are constrained strictly within the range of 0 to 1,
weight generated with min-max scaling outperforms Sigmoid
function. While when the weights are only constrained to be
non-negative, min-shift function surpasses ReLU function. We
assume that both min-max and min-shift produce weights that
take into account the relationships between all phonetic weights.
In contrast, the Sigmoid and ReLU functions generate outputs
based solely on individual phonetic weightings. This observation
leads us to hypothesize that speaker veriﬁcation is a dynamic
process in which the importance of a speciﬁc phoneme is
context-dependent and dynamically related to the weighting of
other phonemes.
F . Comparative Study Across Multiple Datasets
We present the performance of models trained on larger
datasets . As expected, speaker veriﬁcation performance im-
proves with more training samples. However, when evaluat-
ing interpretability using ﬁdelity score, we observe that an
increased number of training samples does not yield beneﬁts to
faithfulness. Especially for difﬁcult test sets that may contain
background noise, such as “V ox1-H” and “SITW-eval”, the
faithfulness of the model degrades signiﬁcantly as the training
dataset grows. We hypothesize two potential reasons for this
behavior. First, it may be attributed to the robustness of the
phoneme boundaries provided by the phoneme recognizer. For
challenging trials, the phoneme recognizer struggles to provide
accurate phoneme boundaries. Second, as the receptive ﬁeld of
the phonetic trait extractor expands, phonetic trait main contains
information extracted from adjacent frames. With the training
set increase, the model becomes more effective at extracting
speaker-discriminative features from adjacent frames. Conse-
quently, when the phonetic traits of a speciﬁc phoneme are not
particularly discriminative, the model may rely on features from
adjacent frames, which could reduce the overall faithfulness. We
believe this phenomenon may also reﬂect a tradeoff between
interpretability and high performance for our model.of V ox2 in
Table VII
Compared to the black-box model, our model has a slightly
smaller parameter size due to the absence of the utterance-level
layer. We also observe that the performance of the released
pre-trained ECAPA-TDNN is better than that of the reproduced
model trained under our pipeline, indicating that the train-
ing mechanism (including augmentation design, optimization
method, and pooling strategy) has a non-negligible impact on
the ﬁnal performance. While our model’s EER still exhibits a
performance gap relative to the SOTA black-box model, the gap
remains within a reasonable and acceptable range. Importantly,
across multiple evaluation sets, our model consistently demon-
strates strong generalization capability.
We believe this performance difference does not solely arise
from the model architecture itself, but also reﬂects the fact that
interpretable speaker veriﬁcation models are still in the early
stage of development, where dedicated training mechanisms
tailored for interpretability have not yet been systematically
explored. As a result, one promising future direction is to in-
vestigate training strategies that are speciﬁcally designed for
interpretable models, rather than directly inheriting training
mechanisms developed for black-box models.
As the ﬁrst study of self-interpretable speaker veriﬁcation,
we acknowledge that several challenges remain. For instance,
phoneme may not represent the optimal minimal unit in the
context of speaker veriﬁcation. Considering the characteristic
of this model, we believe that future research should focus on
disentangling speaker identity from spoken content to further
improve model performance. Another promising direction is to
explore whether PhiNet can be adopted as a ﬁne-tuning step on
top of strong black-box models (e.g., ECAPA-TDNN). Such a
hybrid strategy may leverage the performance of state-of-the-
art models while preserving the interpretability offered by our
framework, which we leave for future investigation.
VI. C
ONCLUSION
We study speaker veriﬁcation with phonetic interpretability
while maintaining high accuracy. The technique allows users to
automate the process of ﬁne-grained voice comparison, visualize
Authorized licensed use limited to: WUHAN UNIVERSITY OF TECHNOLOGY. Downloaded on February 12,2026 at 04:08:19 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

===== PAGE 12 =====
MA et al.: PHINET: SPEAKER VERIFICA TION WITH PHONETIC INTERPRETABILITY 257
TABLE VII
PERFORMANCE OF NETWORKS EV ALUA TED ON THEVOX1-O/E/H, SITW AND LIBRISPEECH.T HE SYSTEM IS TRAINED ON TRAINING SET OF VOXCELEB1 (‘VOX1’)
AND TRAINING SET OF VOXCELEB2( “ VOX2”). “PRE-TRAINED”R EFERS TO THE PRE-TRAINED ECAPA-TDNN BASELINE RELEASED FROM WESPEAKER,W HILE
“REPRODUCED”D ENOTES THE ECAPA-TDNN TRAINED WITH SAME STRA TEGY AS OUR MODEL.
the phonetic trait, and identify each phoneme’s contribution
to the ﬁnal decision. Experiment results show that our system
achieves comparable accuracy while signiﬁcantly improving in-
terpretability. These ﬁndings suggest that phoneme-based anal-
ysis can be a promising direction for improving the transparency
of speaker veriﬁcation systems.
This work lays the groundwork for developing self-
interpretable speaker veriﬁcation networks. We demonstrate the
feasibility of generating meaningful explanations for speaker
veriﬁcation decisions. Despite the challenges, this work marks
a signiﬁcant step toward building systems that are not only ac-
curate but also trustworthy and suitable for high-accountability
applications.
R
EFERENCES
[1] R. Auckenthaler, E. Parris, and M. Carey, “Improving a GMM speaker
veriﬁcation system by phonetic weighting,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf.
Acoustics, Speech, Signal Process., 1999, vol. 1, pp. 313–316.
[2] P . Kenny, M. Mihoubi, and P . Dumouchel, “New map estimators for
speaker recognition,” in Proc. Interspeech, 2003, pp. 2961–2964.
[3] E. S. Parris and M. J. Carey, “Discriminative phonemes for speaker
identiﬁcation,” in Proc. 3rd Int. Conf. Spoken Lang. Process. , 1994,
pp. 1843–1846.
[4] S. S. Kajarekar and H. Hermansky, “Speaker veriﬁcation based on broad
phonetic categories,” in Proc. Speaker Lang. Recognit. Workshop , 2001,
pp. 201–206.
[5] N. Dehak, P . J. Kenny, R. Dehak, P . Dumouchel, and P . Ouellet, “Front-end
factor analysis for speaker veriﬁcation,”IEEE Trans. Audio, Speech, Lang.
Process., vol. 19, no. 4, pp. 788–798, May 2011.
[6] D. Snyder, D. Garcia-Romero, G. Sell, D. Povey, and S. Khudan-
pur, “X-vectors: Robust DNN embeddings for speaker recognition,” in
Proc. 2018 IEEE Int. Conf. Acoust., Speech Signal Process. , 2018,
pp. 5329–5333.
[7] H. Zeinali, S. Wang, A. Silnova, P . Matˇ ejka, and O. Plchot, “But sys-
tem description to voxceleb speaker recognition challenge 2019,” 2019,
arXiv:1910.12592.
[8] B. Desplanques, J. Thienpondt, and K. Demuynck, “ECAPA-
TDNN: Emphasized channel attention, propagation and aggregation
in TDNN based speaker veriﬁcation,” in Proc. Interspeech , 2020,
pp. 3830–3834.
[9] P . Foulkes and P . French, “Forensic speaker comparison: A linguistic–
acoustic perspective,” in The Oxford Handbook of Language and Law .
London, U.K.: Oxford Univ. Press, Mar. 2012, pp. 558–572.
[10] F. Nolan, The Phonetic Bases of Speaker Recognition . Cambridge, U.K.:
Cambridge Univ. Press, 1983.
[11] G. S. Morrison and E. Enzinger, “Introduction to forensic voice com-
parison,” in The Routledge Handbook of Phonetics , Evanston, IL, USA:
Routledge, 2019, pp. 599–634.
[12] F. Beritelli and A. Spadaccini, “The role of voice activity detection
in forensic speaker veriﬁcation,” in Proc. 17th Int. Conf. Digit. Signal
Process., 2011, pp. 1–6.
[13] Y . Tian, L. He, M. Cai, W.-Q. Zhang, and J. Liu, “Deep neural net-
works based speaker modeling at different levels of phonetic granular-
ity,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Acoust., Speech Signal Process. , 2017,
pp. 5440–5444.
[14] K. S. G, T. C. Nagavi and P . Mahesha, “V oice comparison approaches
for forensic application: A review,” in Proc. 3rd Int. Conf. Secure Cyber
Comput. Commun., 2023, pp. 797–802.
[15] H. Wang, S. Zheng, Y . Chen, L. Cheng, and Q. Chen, “CAM++: A fast and
efﬁcient network for speaker veriﬁcation using context-aware masking,”
in Proc. Interspeech, 2023, pp. 5301–5305.
[16] A. B. Arrieta et al., “Explainable artiﬁcial intelligence (XAI): Concepts,
taxonomies, opportunities and challenges toward responsible AI,” Inf.
Fusion, vol. 58, pp. 82–115, 2020.
[17] L. G. Kersta, “V oiceprint identiﬁcation,” Nature, vol. 196, no. 4861, 1962,
Art. no. 1253.
[18] R. H. Bolt, F. S. Cooper, E. E. David, P . B. Denes, J. M. Pickett, and K.
N. Stevens, “Speaker identiﬁcation by speech spectrograms: Some further
observations,” J. Acoust. Soc. America, vol. 54, no. 2, pp. 531–534, 1973.
[19] H. Hollien, The Acoustics of Crime: The New Science of F orensic Phonet-
ics. New Y ork, NY , USA: Springer, 2013.
[20] P . Rose, F orensic Speaker Identiﬁcation. Boca Raton, FL, USA: CRC
Press, 2002.
[21] A. Hirson, P . French, and D. Howard, “Speech fundamental frequency over
the telephone and face-to-face: Some implications for forensic phonetics
1,” in Studies in General and English Phonetics , Evanston, IL, USA:
Routledge, 2012, pp. 230–240.
[22] T. Hudson, G. De Jong, K. McDougall, P . Harrison, and F. Nolan, “F0
statistics for 100 young male speakers of Standard Southern British
English,” in Proc. 16th Int. Congr . Phonetic Sci.
, vol. 6, no. 10, 2007,
pp. 1809–1812.
[23] A. Braun, “Fundamental frequency: How speaker-speciﬁc is it?,” Beiträge
zur Phonetik und Linguistik , vol. 64, pp. 9–23, 1995.
[24] Y . Zhang, P . Tiˇno, A. Leonardis, and K. Tang, “A survey on neural network
interpretability,” IEEE Trans. Emerg. Topics Comput. Intell., vol. 5, no. 5,
pp. 726–742, Oct. 2021.
[25] W. Saeed and C. Omlin, “Explainable AI (XAI): A systematic meta-
survey of current challenges and future opportunities,”Knowl.-Based Syst.,
vol. 263, 2023, Art. no. 110273.
[26] Y . Wang and X. Wang, “Self-interpretable model with transformation
equivariant interpretation,” in Proc. Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst., 2021,
vol. 34, pp. 2359–2372.
[27] D. Alvarez Melis and T. Jaakkola, “Towards robust interpretability with
self-explaining neural networks,” in Proc. Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst.,
vol. 31, 2018.
[28] M. Craven and J. Shavlik, “Extracting tree-structured representations of
trained networks,” in Proc. Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst., 1995, vol. 8.
[29] R. Andrews, J. Diederich, and A. B. Tickle, “Survey and critique of
techniques for extracting rules from trained artiﬁcial neural networks,”
Knowl.-Based Syst., vol. 8, no. 6, pp. 373–389, 1995.
[30] K. Simonyan, A. V edaldi, and A. Zisserman, “Deep inside convolutional
networks: Visualising image classiﬁcation models and saliency maps,” in
Proc. Int. Conf. Learn. Representations , 2014.
[31] R. R. Selvaraju, M. Cogswell, A. Das, R. V edantam, D. Parikh, and D.
Batra, “Grad-CAM: Visual explanations from deep networks via gradient-
based localization,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Comput. Vis., 2017, pp. 618–
626.
[32] M. Sundararajan, A. Taly, and Q. Y an, “Axiomatic attribution for deep
networks,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Mach. Learn. , 2017, pp. 3319–3328.
Authorized licensed use limited to: WUHAN UNIVERSITY OF TECHNOLOGY. Downloaded on February 12,2026 at 04:08:19 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

===== PAGE 13 =====
258 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON AUDIO, SPEECH AND LANGUAGE PROCESSING, VOL. 34, 2026
[33] H. Wang et al., “Score-CAM: Score-weighted visual explanations for
convolutional neural networks,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis.
Pattern Recognit. Workshops, 2020, pp. 24–25.
[34] P .-T. Jiang, C.-B. Zhang, Q. Hou, M.-M. Cheng, and Y . Wei, “LayerCAM:
Exploring hierarchical class activation maps for localization,”IEEE Trans.
Image Process., vol. 30, pp. 5875–5888, 2021.
[35] M. T. Ribeiro, S. Singh, and C. Guestrin, “‘Why should I trust you?’
Explaining the predictions of any classiﬁer,” in Proc. 22nd ACM SIGKDD
Int. Conf. Knowl. Discov. Data Mining , 2016, pp. 1135–1144.
[36] L. S. Shapley, “A value for N-person games,” in Contribution to the Theory
of Games, vol. 2, Princeton, NJ, USA: Princeton Univ. Press, pp. 307–317,
1953.
[37] S. M. Lundberg and S.-I. Lee, “A uniﬁed approach to interpreting
model predictions,” in Proc. Adv. Neural inf. Process. Syst. , 2017,
vol. 30.
[38] V . Petsiuk, A. Das, and K. Saenko, “RISE: Randomized input sampling
for explanation of black-box models,” in Proc. Brit. Mach. Vis. Conf. ,
Newcastle, UK: BMV A Press, Sep. 3–6, 2018, Art. no. 151. [Online].
Available: http://bmvc2018.org/contents/papers/1064.pdf
[39] R. Fong, M. Patrick, and A. V edaldi, “Understanding deep networks via
extremal perturbations and smooth masks,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Int. Conf.
Comput. Vis., 2019, pp. 2950–2958.
[40] F. Wang, H. Liu, and J. Cheng, “Visualizing deep neural network by alter-
nately image blurring and deblurring,”Neural Netw., vol. 97, pp. 162–172,
2018.
[41] Q. Zhang, Y . N. Wu, and S.-C. Zhu, “Interpretable convolutional neural
networks,” in Proc. IEEE Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. , 2018,
pp. 8827–8836.
[42] R. Fong and A. V edaldi, “Net2V ec: Quantifying and explaining how
concepts are encoded by ﬁlters in deep neural networks,” in Proc. IEEE
Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit., 2018, pp. 8730–8738.
[43] F. Dalvi, N. Durrani, H. Sajjad, Y . Belinkov, A. Bau, and J. Glass, “What
is one grain of sand in the desert? Analyzing individual neurons in deep
NLP models,” in Proc. AAAI Conf. Artif. Intell. , 2019, vol. 33, no. 1,
pp. 6309–6317.
[44] C.-K. Y eh, J. Kim, I. E.-H. Y en, and P . K. Ravikumar, “Representer point
selection for explaining deep neural networks,” in Proc. Adv. Neural inf.
Process. Syst., vol. 31, 2018.
[45] P . W. Koh and P . Liang, “Understanding black-box predictions via inﬂu-
ence functions,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Mach. Learn. , 2017, pp. 1885–1894.
[46] O. Li, H. Liu, C. Chen, and C. Rudin, “Deep learning for case-based rea-
soning through prototypes: A neural network that explains its predictions,”
in Proc. AAAI Conf. Artif. Intell. , vol. 32, no. 1, 2018, pp. 3530–3537.
[47] C. Chen, O. Li, D. Tao, A. Barnett, C. Rudin, and J. K. Su, “This looks
like that: Deep learning for interpretable image recognition,” in Proc. Adv.
Neural Inf. Process. Syst., 2019, vol. 32.
[48] D. Rymarczyk, Ł. Struski, M. Górszczak, K. Lewandowska, J. Ta-
bor, and B. Zieli´ nski, “Interpretable image classiﬁcation with differen-
tiable prototypes assignment,” in Proc. Eur . Conf. Comput. Vis. , 2022,
pp. 351–368.
[49] J. Donnelly, A. J. Barnett, and C. Chen, “Deformable protopnet: An inter-
pretable image classiﬁer using deformable prototypes,” inProc. IEEE/CVF
Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit., 2022, pp. 10265–10275.
[50] M. Nauta, J. Schlötterer, M. V an Keulen, and C. Seifert, “PIP-net: Patch-
based intuitive prototypes for interpretable image classiﬁcation,” in Proc.
IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit., 2023, pp. 2744–2753.
[51] E. Kim, S. Kim, M. Seo, and S. Y oon, “XProtoNet: Diagnosis in chest
radiography with global and local explanations,” inProc. IEEE/CVF Conf.
Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit., 2021, pp. 15719–15728.
[52] P . W. Koh et al., “Concept bottleneck models,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Mach.
Learn., 2020, pp. 5338–5348.
[53] Y . Y ang, A. Panagopoulou, S. Zhou, D. Jin, C. Callison-Burch, and M.
Y atskar, “Language in a bottle: Language model guided concept bottle-
necks for interpretable image classiﬁcation,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf.
Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit., 2023, pp. 19187–19197.
[54] M. Wojtas and K. Chen, “Feature importance ranking for deep learning,”
in Proc. Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst., 2020, vol. 33, pp. 5105–5114.
[55] E. Weinberger, J. Janizek, and S.-I. Lee, “Learning deep attribution priors
based on prior knowledge,” in Proc. Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst., 2020,
vol. 33, pp. 14034–14045.
[56] K. Wang, A. V ariengien, A. Conmy, B. Shlegeris, and J. Steinhardt,
“Interpretability in the wild: A circuit for indirect object identiﬁcation
in GPT-2 small,” in Proc. 11th Int. Conf. Learn. Representations , Kigali,
Rwanda: OpenReview.net, May 1–5, 2023. [Online]. Available: https:
//openreview.net/forum?id=NpsVSN6o4ul
[57] N. Nanda, L. Chan, T. Lieberum, J. Smith, and J. Steinhardt,
“Progress measures for Grokking via mechanistic interpretability,” 2023,
arXiv:2301.05217.
[58] H. Shah, A. Ilyas, and A. Madry, “Decomposing and editing predictions
by modeling model computation,” in Proc. 41st Int. Conf. Mach. Learn. ,
2024, pp. 44244–44292,.
[59] M. T. Ribeiro, S. Singh, and C. Guestrin, “Anchors: High-precision model-
agnostic explanations,” in Proc. AAAI Conf. Artif. Intell. , 2018, vol. 32,
no. 1.
[60] A. Dhurandhar et al., “Explanations based on the missing: Towards con-
trastive explanations with pertinent negatives,” in Proc. Adv. Neural Inf.
Process. Syst., 2018, vol. 31.
[61] T. Pedapati, A. Balakrishnan, K. Shanmugam, and A. Dhurandhar, “Learn-
ing global transparent models consistent with local contrastive explana-
tions,” in Proc. Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst. , 2020, vol. 33, pp. 3592–
3602.
[62] P . Li, L. Li, A. Hamdulla, and D. Wang, “Reliable visualization for deep
speaker recognition,” in Proc. Interspeech, 2022, pp. 331–335.
[63] P . Li, L. Li, A. Hamdulla, and D. Wang, “Visualizing data augmentation
in deep speaker recognition,” in Proc. Interspeech, 2023, pp. 2243–2247.
[64] P . Li, T. Wang, L. Li, A. Hamdulla, and D. Wang, “How phonemes
contribute to deep speaker models?,” inProc. 2024 IEEE Int. Conf. Acoust.,
Speech, Signal Process. Workshops, 2024, pp. 838–842.
[65] J. Zhang, L. He, X. Guo, and J. Ma, “A study on visualization of voiceprint
feature,” in Proc. Interspeech, 2023, pp. 2233–2237.
[66] T. Thebaud, G. Sierra, S. Juan, and M. Tahon, “A phonetic analysis of
speaker veriﬁcation systems through phoneme selection and integrated
gradients,” in Proc. Speaker Lang. Recognit. Workshop-Odyssey, 2024.
[67] I. Ben-Amor, J.-F. Bonastre, B. O’Brien, and P .-M. Bousquet, “Describing
the phonetics in the underlying speech attributes for deep and interpretable
speaker recognition,” in Proc. Interspeech, 2023, pp. 3207–3211.
[68] Y . Ma, S. Wang, T. Liu, and H. Li, “ExPO: Explainable phonetic trait-
oriented network for speaker veriﬁcation,” IEEE Signal Process. Lett. ,
vol. 32, pp. 731–735, 2025.
[69] X. Wu, C. Luu, P . Bell, and A. Rajan, “Explainable attribute-based speaker
veriﬁcation,” 2024, arXiv:2405.19796.
[70] J. Zhu, C. Zhang, and D. Jurgens, “Phone-to-audio alignment without text:
A semi-supervised approach,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Acoust., Speech
Signal Process., 2022, pp. 8167–8171.
[71] A. Nagrani, J. S. Chung, and A. Zisserman, “V oxCeleb: A large-scale
speaker identiﬁcation dataset,” inProc. Interspeech, 2017, pp. 2616–2620.
[72] J. Chung, A. Nagrani, and A. Zisserman, “V oxCeleb2: Deep speaker
recognition,” in Proc. Interspeech, 2018, pp. 1086–1090.
[73] M. McLaren, L. Ferrer, D. Castan, and A. Lawson, “The speakers in the
wild (SITW) speaker recognition database,” in Proc. Interspeech, 2016,
pp. 818–822.
[74] V . Panayotov, G. Chen, D. Povey, and S. Khudanpur, “Librispeech: An
ASR corpus based on public domain audio books,” in Proc. 2015 IEEE
Int. Conf. Acoust., Speech Signal Process. , 2015, pp. 5206–5210.
[75] “The CMU pronouncing dictionary,” 2014. Accessed: Mar. 5, 2024. [On-
line]. Available: http://www.speech.cs.cmu.edu/cgi-bin/cmudict
[76] H. Wang et al., “Wespeaker: A research and production oriented speaker
embedding learning toolkit,” inProc. 2023 IEEE Int. Conf. Acoust., Speech
Signal Process., 2023, pp. 1–5.
[77] D. Snyder, G. Chen, and D. Povey, “MUSAN: A music, speech, and noise
corpus,” 2015, arXiv:1510.08484.
[78] T. Ko, V . Peddinti, D. Povey, M. L. Seltzer, and S. Khudanpur, “A study
on data augmentation of reverberant speech for robust speech recogni-
tion,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Acoust., Speech Signal Process. , 2017,
pp. 5220–5224.
[79] J. Wang, F. Zhou, S. Wen, X. Liu, and Y . Lin, “Deep metric learning with
angular loss,” inProc. IEEE Int. Conf. Comput. Vis., 2017, pp. 2593–2601.
[80] A. Moez, B. Jean-François, B. K. Waad, R. Solange, and K. Juliette,
“Phonetic content impact on forensic voice comparison,” in Proc. 2016
IEEE Spoken Lang. Technol. Workshop, 2016, pp. 210–217.
[81] M. Sambur, “Selection of acoustic features for speaker identiﬁcation,”
IEEE Trans. Acoust., Speech, Signal Process., vol. 23, no. 2, pp. 176–182,
Apr. 1975.
[82] K. Amino and T. Arai, “Speaker-dependent characteristics of the nasals,”
F orensic Sci. Int., vol. 185, no. 1–3, pp. 21–28, 2009.
[83] R. Kashyap, “Speaker recognition from an unknown utterance and speaker-
speech interaction,” IEEE Trans. Acoust., Speech, Signal Process., vol. 24,
no. 6, pp. 481–488, Dec. 1976.
[84] C. Kavanagh, “New consonantal acoustic parameters for forensic speaker
comparison,” Ph.D. dissertation, Univ. Y ork, Y ork, U.K., 2012.
Authorized licensed use limited to: WUHAN UNIVERSITY OF TECHNOLOGY. Downloaded on February 12,2026 at 04:08:19 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 